Tutorial: Chase game
====================

In this chapter we will build a complete chase game together, step by
step. The Python we will use is very simple: just conditionals and
loops.

The techniques here should be familiar to you because we used them in
:numref:`code-background`,
:numref:`code-keyboard_input`,
:numref:`code-collisions}` and :numref:`code-chase`

Now we will show you how to put them all together in one program.



Moving Actor over a background
------------------------------

We must create two image files for our game. You can use a program such
as Krita [1]_ to draw them and save them in the ``mu_code/images``
folder (accessible with the ``images`` button in Mu). One is the player,
called ``player.png``. It should be small, about 64×64 pixels. Ideally
it should have a transparent background.

The other is the background for the game itself. It can look like
whatever you want, but it must be the same size as the game window,
which will be 600×600 pixels.

.. figure:: images/figures/krita.png
   :alt: New image in Krita, 600×600
   pixels

   New image in Krita, 600×600 pixels

.. literalinclude:: programs/chase1.py
   :caption: Chase game
   :name: code-chase1
   :linenos:



.. topic:: Exercise

   Run the program and move the Actor around with the keys.


Screen wrap-around
------------------

One problem you will soon find with the program is that you can move off
the edge of the screen and get lost. One way to solve this would be to
stop movement at the screen edges. Instead we going to make the player
teleport to the opposite edge when he leaves the screen. Add this code
to the end of the program, and make sure it is indented so that it
becomes part of the ``update()`` function.

.. code:: python

       if player.x > WIDTH:
           player.x = 0
       if player.x < 0:
           player.x = WIDTH
       if player.y < 0:
           player.y = HEIGHT
       if player.y > HEIGHT:
           player.y = 0

.. topic:: Exercise

   Change the code so that the player stops at the edges rather than wraps-around.


Enemy chases the player
-----------------------

Let’s add an enemy to chase the player. At the top of the program,
create a variable to store the enemy Actor:

.. code:: python

   enemy = Actor("alien")

At the end of the ``draw()`` function (but still indented so part of the
function), draw the enemy. Remember there is only ever one single
``draw()`` function. No program has two. All drawing goes inside this
function.

Here is the complete function including the new line at the end:

.. code:: python

   def draw():
       screen.clear()
       background.draw()
       player.draw()
       enemy.draw()

At the end of the ``update()`` function (but still indented so part of
the function), add these lines to move the enemy:

.. code:: python

       if enemy.x < player.x:
           enemy.x = enemy.x + 1
       if enemy.x > player.x:
           enemy.x = enemy.x - 1
       if enemy.y < player.y:
           enemy.y = enemy.y + 1
       if enemy.y > player.y:
           enemy.y = enemy.y - 1
       if player.colliderect(enemy):
           exit()

.. topic:: Exercise

   Run the program verify the enemy chases the player.


.. topic:: Exercise

   Make the enemy faster so the game is more difficult.


.. topic:: Exercise

   Create an image file `enemy.png` and save it in the `images` folder.  Change the code so it loads `"enemy"` instead of `"alien"`.


Collecting items
----------------

Create a small image file ``coin.png`` and save it in the ``images``
folder. It should look like a coin or something else you would like to
collect. We will also need a variable to store the *score*, i.e. number
of coins collected.

.. code:: python

   coin = Actor("coin", pos=(300,300))
   score = 0

At the end of the ``draw()`` function (but still indented so part of the
function), draw the coin. Remember there is only ever one single
``draw()`` function. No program has two. All drawing goes inside this
function.

Here is the complete function including the new line at the end:

.. code:: python

   def draw():
       screen.clear()
       background.draw()
       player.draw()
       enemy.draw()
       coin.draw()

At the end of the ``update()`` function (but still indented so part of
the function), add these lines to move the coin when it is collected:

.. code:: python

       if coin.colliderect(player):
           coin.x = random.randint(0, WIDTH)
           coin.y = random.randint(0, HEIGHT)
           score = score + 1
           print("Score:", score)

.. topic:: Exercise

   Run the program and collect a coin.  What happens?


::

   NameError: name 'random' is not defined

This happens because we are using a function ``randint()`` to get a
random number. This function is not build-in to Python; it is part of
the *random* library. So at the top of the program, add the first line:

.. code:: python

   import random

.. topic:: Exercise

   Run the program again and collect a coin.  Does it work now?


No!

::

   UnboundLocalError: local variable 'score' referenced before assignment

You will get an error because ``score`` is a global variable and we are
trying to modify it inside the ``update()`` function. Therefore at the
**top** of the ``update()`` function, add this line to declare to Python
our intention to modify a global variable:

.. code:: python

   global score

It must be the **first** line in the function and it must be
**indented**. The lines surrounding it should look like this:

.. code:: python

   def update():
       global score
       if keyboard.right:

.. topic:: Exercise

   Run the program again and verify it works!


Player 2
--------

We can make any game into a two player game. At the top of the program,
create a variable to store the Actor for the second player:

.. code:: python

   player2 = Actor("alien")

At the end of the ``draw()`` function (but still indented so part of the
function), draw the enemy. Here is the complete function with the new
line at the end:

.. code:: python

   def draw():
       screen.clear()
       background.draw()
       player.draw()
       enemy.draw()
       coin.draw()
       player2.draw()

At the end of the ``update()`` function (but still indented so part of
the function), add these lines to move the second player:

.. code:: python

       if keyboard.d:
           player2.x = player2.x + 4
       if keyboard.a:
           player2.x = player2.x - 4
       if keyboard.s:
           player2.y = player2.y + 4
       if keyboard.w:
           player2.y = player2.y - 4
       if player.colliderect(player2):
           exit()

.. topic:: Advanced

   Create a variable `score2` and store the score for player two, i.e. it goes up when he collides with a coin.


Showing the score on the screen
-------------------------------

At the end of the ``draw()`` function (but still indented so part of the
function), draw a title on the screen:

.. code:: python

       screen.draw.text("My game", (200,0), color='red')

The ``draw.text()`` function is not like ``print()`` - it can only print
strings of text, not numbers. Therefore we must convert the score into a
string. Add these lines to the end of the ``draw()`` function:

.. code:: python

       score_string = str(score)
       screen.draw.text(score_string, (0,0), color='green')

.. topic:: Exercise

   Change the colour of the text.


.. topic:: Advanced

   Display the word "Score: " before the score.


.. topic:: Advanced

   When the `score` reaches 10, show a message on the screen to congratulate the player


Timer
-----

Add a variable at the top of the program (but preferably after any
``import`` statements) to store the number of seconds of time remaining
in the game:

.. code:: python

   time = 20

Pygame Zero calls our ``update()`` function many times per second. We
can ask it to tell us how much time has passed by adding a *parameter*
to the function, ``delta``. We then subtract this from the remaining
time. Modify ``update()`` so the first lines look like this:

.. code:: python

   def update(delta):
       global score, time
       time = time - delta
       if time <= 0:
            exit()

We can also display the time on the screen. At the end of the ``draw()``
function (but still indented so part of the function) add these lines:

.. code:: python

       time_string = str(time)
       screen.draw.text(time_string, (50,0), color='green')

.. topic:: Exercise

   Run the program.  Could the displayed time be improved?


We don’t need to see the decimal places in the time. Modify those lines
to use the ``round()`` function, like this:

.. code:: python

       time_string = str(round(time))
       screen.draw.text(time_string, (50,0), color='green')

Finished game
-------------

Here is the finished game with all the changes included:

.. literalinclude:: programs/chaser7.py
   :caption: Finished chase game
   :name: code-chaser7
   :linenos:





Ideas for extension
-------------------

There are many things you could add to this game.

-  Add more enemies.

-  Give the player three lives.

-  Add music and sound effects.

-  Create a powerup that makes the player move faster.

-  Make the enemies more intelligent.

-  Allow the player to kill the enemies.

.. [1]
   https://krita.org
